feat(k8s): explain thoroughly how to upgrade (#1665)
scaleway/docs-content: containers/kubernetes/how-to/properly-upgrade-kubernetes-version.mdx

---
meta:
title: How to properly upgrade your Kubernetes Kapsule cluster
description: This page explains how to properly upgrade your Kubernetes Kapsule cluster
content:
h1: How to properly upgrade your Kubernetes Kapsule cluster
paragraph: This page explains how to upgrade your Kubernetes Kapsule cluster
tags: kubernetes kubernetes-kapsule kapsule cluster
dates:
categories:
  - kubernetes
---

<Macro id="iam-requirements" />

<Message type="requirement">
    - You have a working [CLI](https://github.com/scaleway/scaleway-cli) with your credentials set up
    - You have a Kubernetes Kapsule cluster which is not running the latest k8s version available on Kapsule API and
    you're willing to upgrade it.
</Message>

> First, we'll make sure your workload can be properly handled by the newer Kapsule version. We have a compatibility matrix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we will ensure the newer Kapsule version properly handles your workload. We have a compatibility matrix
```

for different components and your current cluster may use components that are deprecated or not available on the new version.
Please see our [version policy](https://www.scaleway.com/en/docs/containers/kubernetes/reference-content/version-support-policy/).

For each version upgrade, the client is encouraged to read kubernetes [changelog](https://kubernetes.io/releases/).

## Checking which components must be changed

An easy way to visualize this is with the command `scw k8s version list`.
e.g.
```
1.25.9   [cilium calico kilo]                [none]                 [containerd]
1.24.13  [cilium calico weave flannel kilo]  [none]                 [containerd crio]
1.23.17  [cilium calico weave flannel kilo]  [none nginx traefik2]  [containerd crio docker]
```

### Ingresses

> Managed Ingresses are deprecated since the minor release 1.24, we provide the feature EasyDeploy instead to set up an ingress controller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Managed ingress controllers are deprecated since the minor release 1.24, we provide the feature EasyDeploy instead to set up an ingress controller.
```

You can also deploy an ingress controller by yourself to fine tune its settings.

To update a cluster to a version superior to 1.23, this command is necessary to deactivate the managed ingress controller
`scw k8s cluster update $CLUSTER_ID ingress=none`

### Container runtimes

We only provide support for containerd from 1.25 and above. You will need to create new Kapsule pools with containerd as a runtime to migrate your existing pools.
Here's how:
1. Create the pool
  `scw k8s pool create container-runtime=containerd zone=$POOL_ZONE size=$SIZE_OF_YOUR_OLD_POOL version=$YOUR_CLUSTER_VERSION cluster-id=$CLUSTER_ID`
2. Wait for the nodes to be provisioned
  `scw k8s pool wait $POOL_ID`

> 3. In parallel, you can start cordoning nodes using the old runtime. this way, workload will get rescheduled directly on the containerd nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. In parallel, you can start cordoning nodes using the old runtime. This way, the workload will get rescheduled directly on the `containerd` nodes.
```

  `kubectl cordon $OLD_NODE_A $OLD_NODE_B $OLD_NODE_C ...`
4. Once the new nodes are ready, you can start draining the old nodes, you may need to add the option `--delete-emptydir-data` if you used local disk as a scratchpad.
  `kubectl drain --ignore-daemonsets $NODE_TO_DRAIN`
    <Message type="important">

>         DO NOT drain all the nodes simultaneously, prefer doing it sequentially, making sure your workload is behaving as expected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        **Do not** drain all the nodes simultaneously. Prefer doing it sequentially, making sure your workload is behaving as expected.
```

Reviewer 2: maybe "We recommend doing it..."

Reviewer 2: "Make sure to do it ..." then

    </Message>
5. At this point, nodes from your old pool should be empty of any workload. If so, they are ready for deletion.
  `kubectl delete node $OLD_NODE_A $OLD_NODE_B $OLD_NODE_C ...`
6. Finally, delete your old pool
  `scw k8s pool delete $OLD_POOL_ID`

### CNIs

> If your cluster is using a deprecated CNI, and you're willing to upgrade to a newer k8s version, you will most likely have to spin up a new Kapsule cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your cluster is using a deprecated CNI, and you are willing to upgrade to a newer k8s version, you will most likely have to spin up a new Kapsule cluster.
```

We do not provide (as of now) an easy way to change CNI. This component is integrated in each cluster node which results in a tricky transition.

> Do not hesitate to contact us on our Slack community channel #k8s or open a support ticket if you're in this situation and need help.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Do not hesitate to contact us on our Slack community channel #k8s or open a support ticket if you have any issues.
```

Reviewer 2: Il faudrait ajouter un lien vers le community ici

## Effective Upgrade

So, we have two possible paths from here, you're either upgrading one minor version or multiple ones.

### One minor version

This is pretty straightforward, you will first upgrade your control-plane.
`scw k8s cluster upgrade $CLUSTER_ID version=$NEW_K8S_VERSION`
You can choose to upgrade the pools as well, if so append the previous command with `upgrade-pools=true`

You can also upgrade one pool independently with
`scw k8s pool upgrade $POOL_ID version=$NEW_K8S_VERSION`

> You can be extra cautious and migrate manually your workload. To do so, follow the steps described in [runtimes](###Container runtimes) section,

Reviewer 2: il marche le lien ici ?

Author: pas sûr, je n'arrive pas à prévisualiser le mdx dans mon éditeur mais j'ai une piste plus vraisemblable sur la syntaxe

Reviewer 2: oui le commentaire c'etait plus pour @bene2k1 quand il testera la page avant de merger :)

Author: okok, j'ai changé la syntaxe
